---
layout: single
title: "Week 1 - Mathematical Statements"
excerpt: "Week 1 - Mathematical Statements"
sidebar:
    nav: "s3maths"
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/bca/s3-dm-w1.jpg
author_profile: false
comments: false
share: true
tags:
  - bca
  - maths
  - maths statements
category:
  - bca
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
toc_label: "On This Page"
toc_icon: "list-ul"

---

## Discrete Mathematics
- The study of mathematical structures that are fundamentally discrete rather than continuous.

## Why discrete?
- Computers use bits (1s and 0s) to store and process information, making discrete elements important for computing.
- Many real-world problems can be represented using discrete mathematics.

## Mathematical Statements - Definition
- These are sentences that can be either true or false but not both.

## Types of Statements
1. **Atomic**: Simple, cannot be broken down further (e.g., "Three is an odd number").
2. **Molecular**: Compound, composed of atomic statements connected by logical connectives (e.g., "The sun is shining, and it is cold").

## Logical Connectives
1. **"and" (∧)**: Conjunction (e.g., "It is raining and it is cold").
2. **"or" (∨)**: Disjunction (e.g., "100 is a multiple of 5 or 10").
3. **"if...then" (⟶)**: Implication/Conditional (e.g., "If a number is odd then it is prime").
4. **"if and only if" (⟷)**: Equivalence/Bi-conditional (e.g., "A rectangle is a square if and only if all its four sides are equal").
5. **"not" (¬)**: Negation (e.g., "Seven is not greater than fourteen").

## Propositional Variables
- Represented by P, Q, R, S, etc., and can stand for any statement.

## Truth Condition
- P∧Q is TRUE when both P and Q are TRUE
- P∨Q is TRUE when P or Q or both are TRUE
- P⟶Q is TRUE when P is FALSE, or Q is TRUE or both
- P⟷Q is TRUE when P and Q are both TRUE or both FALSE.
- ~P is TRUE when P is FALSE

## Truth Table
- Displays the relationships between the truth values of propositions.

## Implication
- P ⟶ Q is true when P is false, or Q is true, or both.

## Converse & Contrapositive
- Converse: Q ⟶ P
- Contrapositive: ¬Q ⟶ ¬P

## If and only if
- P ⟶Q is logically equivalent to (P ⟶Q) ∧ (Q ⟶P)
- P is necessary for Q means Q ⟶P
- P is sufficient for Q means P ⟶Q
- If P is necessary and sufficient for Q, then P ⟶Q

## Equivalence
- P ⟷ Q is true when P and Q are both true or both false.

## Predicates
- Express the nature of a subject (e.g., P(x): x is greater than 7).

## Quantifiers
1. **Universal Quantifiers (∀)**: "For all" or "every" (e.g., ∀x (x ≥ 0) means every number is greater than or equal to 0).
2. **Existential Quantifiers (∃)**: "There exists" or "there is" (e.g., ∃x (x < 0) means there is a number less than 0).

### Quantifiers and Negation
- ¬∀x P(x) is equivalent to ∃x ¬P(x)
- ¬∃x P(x) is equivalent to ∀x ¬P(x)